---
name: qgproj
title: Quantum circuits for Ising spin networks
---

To describe gravity on small scales or in high-energy situations, we need a quantum theory of gravity. Einstein's theory of general relativity is a fairly good description of gravity in many situations. However, to understand extreme phenomena such as black holes or the beginning of the universe, quantum gravity is necessary. General relativity teaches us that gravity is actually the geometry of spacetime, so quantum gravity should give us a fundamental description of space and time. Our naïve understanding of space and time can completely collapse. It is possible that space and time are just emergent phenomena, which means that in principle there is no space and time, but there is some other thing that interacts and looks like space-time from our point of view.

There is currently no confirmed theory of gravity. However, there are a number of proposals for the formulation of quantum gravity, such as string theory, causal dynamical triangulations, or loop quantum gravity. We focus on the last theory, loop quantum gravity (LQG). In this theory, the geometry of space is described by spin networks. Imagine a space consisting of many small tetrahedra, like "atoms" of space, which are glued together. We can describe this set of tetrahedra by a graph in which each node corresponds to a tetrahedron and the links show the connectivity between them. Each link is labeled with a half integer number - the value of the spin. This number corresponds to the area of the face of the tetrahedron.

Computing explicit quantum states of some complicated spin networks is very difficult. So we develop methods that use quantum computers to simulate spin networks. In our previous paper we presented circuits to generate single nodes, i.e. single tetrahedra. In our current paper we present methods to simulate arbitrary networks with fixed spins equal to one half. Let us see how our method works.

As we said links of spin networks are labelled by spin numbers, mathematically speaking it means that they are labelled by representation of group SU(2), and this can be interpreted physically using physical quantity - spin. So we can imagine that on each link leave pair of particles with spins given by label of the link, in our case it will always be spin half. We need to generate these pairs of spins on a quantum processor.

A quantum processor consists of qubits. These quantum analogs of bits, are two-level quantum systems and can be interpreted as spins half. We can use qubits as spins which live on links of spin network. To change the state of qubits on quantum computer, we can use quantum gates, which are analogs of classical gates. To prepare singlet state of two spins by half, we need to take two qubits, then apply so called Hadamard gate on the first one, not gate on the second one and then control not gate on both of them. After these operations these two qubits represent singlet state of two spins half, i.e. link of our spin network. We have to prepare such a state for each link in spin network. Let us show an example of a very simple spin network. Dipole spin network has two nodes connected by four links, it represents two tetrahedra. To simulate this state we need eight qubits because there are four links and we need two qubits for each link. We can also think that we need one spin, or qubit in our case, for each face of the tetrahedra. So we apply gates to eight qubits to prepare four links, but there is one more important thing about spin networks.

As we said, spins correspond to faces of tetrahedron and value of spin corresponds to area of face, but not all triangles with given area can form tetrahedron. We have to choose the state which is able to build a tetrahedron. It can be shown mathematically that vectors normal to faces of any polyhedron sum up to zero. At the level of spins, this means that spins meeting at a node must sum to zero, i.e. the total spin must be zero. This is called the Gauss constraint.

To implement the Gauss constraint, we introduce an operator that projects the states of the links onto the space of states that fulfill this constraint. This operator consists of some quantum gates followed by projection of three qubits on state zero. At the end, on the first qubit we obtain the state of the node, which corresponds to the state of the links meeting in this node, but after applying the Gaussian constraint. It can be shown that for spins one-half, the space of solutions of the Gauss constraint is two-dimensional, so the state of the node can be represented on a single qubit.

Let us return to the dipole example. We have prepared four links and now we need to apply Gauss constraint on links meeting at the same node. The first four qubits correspond to the links meeting at the first node, so we apply our operator. And the next four spins correspond to links meeting at the second node, so we also apply our operator. At the end of the procedure we obtain the state of the dipole, that is, the state of the nodes, represented on two qubits.

Exactly the same procedure can be done for larger spin networks. Let us see the case of the pentagram. This is a network with five nodes and ten links. So we prepare ten pairs of qubits and then apply five projectors. At the end we get five qubits carrying the state of the pentagram spin network.

As we can see, the number of required qubits is four times larger than the number of nodes in the spin network. However, we can reduce the number of required qubits. We can prepare larger networks by preparing smaller networks as building blocks and then glue them together. For example, we can construct a network with four nodes and four free links, a kind of "open pentagram". We just prepare ten links as in the pentagram case and then we apply Gauss constraint only to four nodes, leaving one node unprojected, i.e. leaving four spins alive at the end of free links. In the end we get an eight-qubit state. Where four qubits are related to four nodes and four qubits are related to four free links.

Then, using the state of "open pentagram", we can glue two such states and prepare the state of spin network with ten nodes.

Our goal is to simulate large spin networks in order to study the so-called semiclassical behavior of LQG. It is worth emphasizing that we are only considering quantum space here, not time; spin networks describe the geometry of space. To describe the geometry of spacetime we need to use so-called spinfoams, which are spin networks evolved in time. But this is the future of our research.